FREEDOTS -*- mode: org; fill-column: 78 -*-

* General
** TODO Refactor code

Alot of the code currently in use has been written ad-hoc, without a lot
of planning ahead.  Many of the items below will first need a bit
of refactoring of the current codebase.  Some ideas:

*** TODO musicxml.Measure?

I have been going back and forth between a relatively flat event-list
representation (what we currently have in MusicList) and a representation
where measures are container objects, like they are in musicxml.
I am still not sure what is better, but it looks like the measure abstraction
is useful for a number of reasons.

Create a musicxml.Measure class which has start/stopBar accessors.
Also, maybe create staff objects at construction time inside of the measure.

This will need major refactoring of all the client code, namely playback
and transcription.  It would also mean that all classes derived
from VerticalEvent can go away.

** TODO Review and upgrade scores/*.xml

The example scores ("Library") are generated with different methods.  Some have
been scanned with PhotoScore (MusicXML 1.0/1.1) from Lilypond generated
printouts, others were mostly written by hand in Emacs with a few Lisp macros,
and one score has been written in Sibelius by a very kind contributor.
Many scores do not support beam/stem/accidental elements.  FreeDots doesn't
really care about those, but other programs might.  Some scores even contain
minor remaining errors.  They all should be imported into a pro notation editor
like Sibelius or Finale, and checked for validity that way.  Where apropriate,
beaming and stem directions should be added and the resoluting scores should
be normalized so that a diff shows the actual changes done by the application
in use.  Ideally, all scores should be upgraded to MusicXML 2.0.  While
FreeDots is deliberately designed to be very liberal with what it accepts
(braille music doesn't care about stem direction, so we simply totally ignore
it), other more visually oriented notation programs might have problems with
scores in such a "raw" encoding.

** TODO Portable exception reporting to a central place

For better quality of MusicXML parsing, a fascility should be developed
which sends an exception whenever it happens via email + the
XML in question attached.  This should only trigger after
the user confirmed this to happen.  This fascility should also
only be enabled in download versions so that developers do not
accidentally generate such mails.

* MusicXML

** TODO Properly handle spanners
*** TODO Fix slur parsing

Currently, slur handling is somewhat broken and needs
an overhaul.  The aim is obviously to parse existing complicated
MusicXML files with things like cross-staff-slurs and cross-voice-slurs
such that the actual musical intent is preserved.

The <slur> element inside <notations> is type start-stop-continue.
The continue type is currently completely unimplemented.

*** TODO Allow to query time-modification groups

As it stands, we currently just know if a certain note is time-modified
(for tripplets and alike), but we can not see the individual groups
of notes, which we need for transcription.  In braille music, we need
to prefix the first note of a tripplet with a certain sign, also subject
to doubling.  Similarily to slurs, handle time-modification groups, but do not
use the tuplet element, since that is optional in a sense.  (in MusicXML,
the tuplet element is used to indicate the graphical bracket, which might
be absent in some scores.  The time-modification element is necessary
in all cases.  In braille music, the tripplet sign is required
so that the resulting note values do make sense.  So we always want
to indicate tuplets correctly, even if the score didn't specify
them graphically.  Therefore, only trust time-modification, the
tuplet element can be ignored for now (but would be nice to have
for later ideas.))

See [[*Tuplets][tuplets in braille transcription]].

** TODO Transposition

*** TODO Handle the transpose element

MusicXML has a <transpose> element which is used in various
situations around transposing instruments.  This element is currently
unsupported, should be imlemented (see scores/bwv999.xml).

*** TODO Allow on-the-fly transposition of a score

The user should be able to transpose a given score to a different
key.  This will be a method of the Score class.
The UI would offer the ability to trigger that method, and retranscribe
the resulting score to braille.  This will be very useful for a lot of
real-life music situations.  For instance, your teacher wants you to
play a certain piece in F major, but you could only find an arrangement in
D major.  With this feature, you'd just instruct FreeDots to tranpose
the score up by 3 half-steps.

Hint: libmusicxml (C++) used to implement transposition algorithms.
We can learn from reading that.

** TODO Redo voice handling to support "forks and joins" at arbitrary positions

One of the main reasons why the part-measure in-accord alogirthm is
so incomplete and potentially buggy is that MusicList.getVoice() is
apparently insufficient for properly querying changes in the
structure of the music.  We want to easily see if a voice
comes in (possibly in the middle of a measure).  MusicList.getVoice()
currently presumes the whole sequence processed has the same amount
of voices.  While the data structure is robust enough to work
for MIDI playback, we'd like to be able to do more intelligent
querying so that the part-measure in-accord algorithm can be
rewritten.  Maybe look into the MusicXML2Braille paper by Goto et al,
they seem to have worked out a low-level structure for storing
parallel voices already.

** TODO Note.Notations.Technical.getPluck()

** TODO Note.Notations.Technical.getString()

* Testsuite

Write more tests.

* Transcription
Braille transcription is the core functionality of FreeDots, and
also the most complicated to implement.  In a sense, what is there already is
mostly still a prototype.  Nothing is set in stone yet.

Some of the changes below might also involve changing the freedots.musicxml
package to fascilitate easier information retrieval.

** TODO Tuplets

MusicXML has two ways of specifying tuples.
One is via the time-modification element, whcih affects the
duration of the note during playback.
The other is the <suplet> element inside of <notations> which
is solely ment for graphical representation.
This means programs might export MusicXML without the <tuplet>
element (when there is no special graphical markup) but
it always needs to use time-modification so that the timing is correct.
Therefore, FreeDots should probably consider time-modification and not
the <tuplet> element, since un-marked-up tuplets would lead to unclear braille.

What we need is some way to group time-modified notes together
such that the transcriber can ask if a certain note/chord
is the first element of a tuplet group.  If so, it would
emit the appropriate braille symbol for the particular tuplet.
Note that tuplets are subject to doubling, as are most things in braille music.

** TODO Directions

Currently directions like dynamics (forte...) and text ("poco"...) are
silently ignored.  Some way needs to be found to integrate them
into the transcription process.  Directions belong to a particular
staff, but not to a particular voice.  So when parallel voices are present,
the transcription code needs to decide in which voice to print them.
Possibly always the first voice.
The voice handling code needs to somehow take this into account.

** TODO Key and clef changes

These are also currently not output.  They are somewhat related to Directions
since they belong to a staff, but not to a particular voice.

*** Clef change

Clef changes are basically irrelevant to the braille music reader.
However, for collaboration and communication with sighted music readers,
it can be very helpful to know where the clef changes.

*** TODO Key change

Key changes usually occur at the beginning of a measure.  Can they also occur
in the middle?  A key change is very important, and needs to be printed for
the music to make sense.

** TODO Repetitions

The simile sign (⠶) is useful for indicating repetitions that
are usually not marked up specially in visual notation.
This, in combination with [[*Doubling]] can be thought of as a compression
method.
*** TODO Do not use repeat sign if no space is saved

Currently, if a measure only consists of a single cell note and that
measure is repeated, the simile sign is used.  This unnecessarily makes
it harder to read the melody.  The simile sign should probably
have a configurable treshold, maybe defaulting to at least needing
to save 2 (or 1?) cells.  All the repetition detection variants below
need to take this into account to make resulting scores more readable.

*** TODO repetition detection needs to ignore certain objects

If measure1 contains a direction (or similar) and measure 2 does not
but both contain the same notes, repetition signs should be used.
Similarily, if both measures start with a different dynamics indicator,
only that needs to be printed and the repetition sign can be used
to indicate that the notes are the same.

This rule also applies to repetition detection in partial or full
parallel voices described below.

*** STARTED Repetition of whole measures

This is implemented but needs extra work.  Basically, the current
implementation is just a variant of equals() which ignores the
note offset.  Another method is defined on the primary
MusicList container to compare two containers for note equality.
This is just a one-shot prototype which needs to be rethought to
be more flexible.

*** TODO Repetition of voices

Sometimes (see bwv999) a certain voice repeats itself from
measure to measure.  The simile sign can be used here as well.

This used to work in the FreeDots python prototype, but
given the complexity (and crazyness) of the current transcription
classes it doesn't work anymore in the Java version.
This should be relatively trivial to do though.

*** TODO Repetition of beats

If a beat inside a voice is repeated the simile sign can be used as well.
This occurs frequently, notably in the moonshine sonata in combination
with tripplets.

The example given above becomes

⠆⠆⠸⠓⠐⠙⠋⠸⠓⠐⠙⠋⠶ ⠶

Note that first, simile is used to indicate beat repetition, and then,
simile is used to indicate the repetition of the previous measure, resulting
in 8 identical tripplets being played over the time of two measures
in 2/2 time.

Note that simile could also be used like this:
⠼⠃⠆ ⠆⠆⠸⠓⠐⠙⠋⠶⠶⠶

However, it might be desireable to have this behaviour configurable,
i.e., if repetition detection should be limited to beats only,
or if it should also be done with smaller subgroups if the resulting
braille is shorter, should be a boolean option for the user.

This said, the repetition detection algorithm needs to divide
a sequence of notes (measure or partial voice) up into its beats, if that
works see if there are identical connected groups.  As above, this technique
needs to be limited according to its savings, so in 4/4 time ⠹⠹⠹⠹ shouldn't become
⠹⠶⠶⠶ which just obscurs things but doesn't save any cells.

** TODO Doubling

Doubling is a very fundamental technique in braille music notation.
Basically, if *something* other than a note repeats itself more than three
times, it can be written twice in the first occurance, ommited for the rest
upto the last occurance, where it is reinstatate a single time to indicate
the end of the passage.

While this sounds simple and is easy to read, designing a data structure
to detect it seems not so easy since this rule is very generic.  A few
examples might help:

*** TODO Doubling slurs

The simplest case is a slur spanning a across four notes and more.
Without doubling, a C scale slurred is

  ⠙⠉⠑⠉⠋⠉⠛⠉⠓⠉⠊⠉⠚⠉⠙

with doubling it becomes:

  ⠙⠉⠉⠑⠋⠛⠓⠊⠚⠉⠙

(note that doubling is not limited to measure boundaries, it applies
to the whole paragraph at least, if not page or piece)

*** TODO Doubling intervals

However, doubling can also occur with intervals.  The left hand of the
first four measures of LV Beethovens Moonshine sonata reads:

⠼⠙⠩⠼⠃⠆ ⠸⠜⠽⠤ ⠾⠤ ⠎⠤⠟⠤ ⠗⠤⠗⠤

which could be written as

⠼⠙⠩⠼⠃⠆ ⠸⠜⠽⠤⠤ ⠾ ⠎⠟ ⠗⠗⠤

As a rule, if more then three chords are played in a sequence and
one (or more) of its intervals reoccurs within the whole sequence,
it should be doulbed in the first chord and reprinted in the
last chord.

*** TODO Doubling Tuplets

Similarily but this time as a prefix, tripplet (and alike)
signs (⠆) can be doubled if a series of tripllets follow.

Example:

⠆⠸⠓⠐⠙⠋⠆⠸⠓⠐⠙⠋⠆⠸⠓⠐⠙⠋⠆⠸⠓⠐⠙⠋

vs

⠆⠆⠸⠓⠐⠙⠋⠸⠓⠐⠙⠋⠸⠓⠐⠙⠋⠆⠸⠓⠐⠙⠋

(note: tradeoffs should eventually be considered as well.
The example is contrived since the passage actually continues
on for a few measures like that, so doubling is definitely desireable,
however, if we look at the example as it is, the second version is just
one cell shorter while the first version is easier to read.
Seen from that perspective, doubling should probably be scored on the basis
of how many cells it saves.  A user configurable value with a default
of 2 seems sensible at first thought.)

** TODO Lead sheets (lyrics and chord symbols)

MusicXML supports parts with lyric text.  A very good
repository for such files is at http://www.wikifonia.org/

Currently only section by section format prints lyrics *and* chord symbols.
Bar over Bar format needs additional work to print chord symbols,
and allow for fancy alignment.

*** TODO Implement bindings for liblouis for contracting lyrics

Ideally, lyrics should be contracted with the contracted braille
of course of the user.  Therefore, we'd like to have bindings
to liblouis, ideally on Linux *and* Windows.

** TODO Note groupings

Note grouping is basically beaming for braille music.
For the detailed rules, see the braille music manual.

The complicated issue about note grouping is that the use of the music hyphen
disallows note groupings.  So once we have the first braille
representation of a measure to check if it fits onto the current line,
we might figure out that the music hyphen needs to be used if it does.
If we instruct the measure to hyphenate at a certain position,
the measure needs to undo note groupings.

** TODO in-accord and partial measures

If notes in a measure run in parallel it is the choice of the
transcriber what to do, options are:
 * use intervals: This is concise but might make it less obvious how
   several voices run individually.  In a 3 voice measure (treble clef) you'd
   always need to read the top note and both intervals to know what the
   bottom note is.
 * use in-accord separators (full-measure and part-measure): This can make
   several voices pretty clear, but usually results in more cells being used.

Considerations: It really depends on the music if intervals
or in-accord separators should be used.  It might be a good idea
to have a interval-cancel feature which would allow the user
to select a chord and request it not being written with interval notation.

Additionally, the use of part-measure in-accord can further
complicate things.  There is almost always the choice of using
only full-measure in-accord, however, what is more readable
is really hard to tell programmatically (at least I think so for now).
Also, there seem to be cases where part-measure in-accord is
necessary to convey what happens (full-measure in accord wouldn't work, see
below).

This said, MusicXML has also several ways to convey identical
structure.  Either <chord/> is used to combine notes (this
is really just syntactic sugar for manipulating the tick) or <backup> is used
to write the notes in several sweeps from left to right.  However, visually,
there is no difference, so ideally, FreeDots would not care how the original
MusicXML is specified.  Chords should be detected as such also if <chord/>
is not used but notes appears to be parallel.  It should
be a setting at transcription time that tells the system if
intervals are allowed and if full-measure in-accord only, or in-accord in
general is supposed to be used.

We need to find an intermediate representation that allows for
easy querying of structure such that parallel notes and partial
voices can be handled.  In 4/4 time, imagine a measure
that starts with a quarter c, but continues with a dotted half
b and d.  This is part-measure in accord, and would be written
as qc>hb,hd (> terminates a partial measure and , separates partial-measure
in-accord).

To top if off, it would be desireable to design the transcription
phase such that all possible transcriptions of a measure (given
the restrictions specified by the user) are generated and the
best (shortest) version is used.  However, this could lead
to strange transcriptions if the method varies from measure to measure,
so step up in the hierarchy and make the decision based
on scoring all measures.  But this will not work with
music that changes a lot, which is probably the default, so...

*** Examples
BWV988 Aria m1 left hand:

⠸⠜⠸⠗⠄⠇⠣⠜⠧⠨⠅⠸⠞⠐⠂⠧⠐⠱ or
⠸⠜⠸⠗⠄⠇⠣⠜⠧⠸⠞⠣⠜⠧⠧⠐⠱ or

BWV 1004 Chaconne m1:

⠧⠨⠅⠐⠪⠄⠊⠐⠂⠨⠟⠬ or
⠧⠨⠅⠐⠪⠄⠊⠐⠂⠨⠟⠐⠂⠨⠕

* Playback

** TODO Correctly play tied notes

Currently, tied notes are played as their individual notes.  Their
actualy duration should be summed up and only one pair of MIDI
events should be generated so that no additional attack(s) are heard.

** TODO Play grace notes

For simplicity, grace notes are currently just not played at all.
This should be fixed, grace notes should be played like any
other note.  A grace note steals time from adjacent notes.  Also, investigate
cue notes.

** TODO Play all supported articulations and ornaments

As an example, the turn ornament is executed already.
Many more things need doing, like proper dynamics, articulation
(staccato etc) and mordent etc.

* User interface
** TODO Transcription preferences

There should be a dialog for configuring the preferences related
to transcription.  Currently that means all Options that can
be set from the command-line.  For instance, there is currently no way
to change the page width and height from within the GUI.

Also, as we implement the various todo items in this file,
more and more preferences should be added.

** TODO Editing of fingering

freedots.musicxml almost supports setting fingering already.

*** STARTED keyboard fingering

This is the simplest case.  Most of the time only a single
finger needs to be specified, sometimes fingers need to change
on one note (silent finger change).

*** TODO Fingering string instruments

For string instruments, the UI would need to ask for left and right hand
fingering.  Left hand fingering has the unfretted string as a special
exception.  There is probably some work to do
in the freedots.musicxml package to support this properly.
Currently the implementation just stupidly assumes
fingering is just a list of finger numbers, i.e. it only
supports keyboard fingering.

** TODO Editing of articulations

A note can have a set of articulation marks attached to it.
Editing of those is a non-structural change, i.e. it
does work with the current musicxml handling.

Write a dialog which allows the user to change the articulation marks attached to a certain note.

** TODO Create log view widget

The class freedots.logging.Logger currently implements a simple miltiplex
of log messages to the console and to a queue.
The GUI needs some usability work.

** TODO Colors for categories of braille signs

It might be helpful for sighted users if the different types
of braille signs that can occur in a score would use different
colours on-screen.

** TODO Look into functionality for blind users who do not use braille

Currently out of scope for this project, but still something we should keep
open for.  I've received a few emails from potential users who didn't or
could not use braille.  They would have prefered a speech based
interface for reading music.


* MS Windows Installer
** TODO Check error during installation

Some users have reported some kind of error (no details) during
installation.

** TODO Provide an option to install Java Access Bridge

Currently, on the JRE is installed if none exists.  Ideally, the user
should be prompted if they want to install java access bridge
as well, since most screen readers on Windows require that.

* Port to Java Mobile Devices API (for accessible cellphones)

It would be neat if a blind user could use FreeDots interactively on their
cellphone.  Nokia phone screen readers like Talks can drive a braille
display connected via bluetooth.  We'd need to write a UI based
on the java standards for mobile devices and create a special
.jar for that platform.  The MIDI playback code also needs some special
porting.

